Add MCP Server Quickstart (#1179)
DuendeSoftware/docs.duendesoftware.com: astro/src/content/docs/identityserver/quickstarts/8-mcp.mdx

---

> title: "Connecting an MCP Server and Client with DCR"

Reviewer: Quickstarts is a good location, we can move it elsewhere when needed.

> title: "Connecting an MCP Server and Client with DCR"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Securing an MCP Server with IdentityServer"
```

> title: "Connecting an MCP Server and Client with DCR"

Reviewer 2: Make the title of the page "Dynamic Client Registration" while you can use a label in the sidebar to have it be DCR

Reviewer: Frame it from AI/MCP perspective, DCR is secondary

> description: "Learn how to build a secure MCP server that protects requests using Duende IdentityServer and allows any client to dynamically connect."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to protect an MCP server with Duende IdentityServer so AI clients can securely connect using OAuth and Dynamic Client Registration."
```

date: 2026-08-07T01:00:00+00:00
sidebar:
  order: 16
---

import { Code } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";
import { Tabs, TabItem } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";

> Duende IdentityServer contains the [Dynamic Client Registration (DCR)](/identityserver/configuration/dcr) feature which allows an application to add clients at runtime instead of requiring you to statically create them on startup with code, or loading them from persistent storage. This quickstart will show you how to create an MCP server that dynamically adds clients at runtime to connect to Duende IdentityServer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI agents and tools increasingly communicate via the Model Context Protocol (MCP). This quickstart shows how to secure an MCP server with Duende IdentityServer, using [Dynamic Client Registration (DCR)](/identityserver/configuration/dcr.mdx) so any compliant client can connect without being pre-configured.
```

> :::caution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
```

I'd go with a lighter touch here.

Each client that dynamically that connects to IdentityServer using DCR counts towards the Client Ids allowed in your license.
:::

> 

Reviewer: Before digging in do we need a quick "architecture diagram" or Mermaid or something to show how the components relate?

## Setting Up The Projects

> We will create 3 projects. An IdentityServer project, an MCP Server, and a console client which will make requests to the MCP. We'll start by creating a directory to store the 3 projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will create 3 projects. An IdentityServer project, an MCP Server, and a console client which will make requests to the MCP server. We'll start by creating a directory to store the 3 projects.
```

mkdir mcp-quickstart
cd mcp-quickstart
```

### Create the IdentityServer Project

The IdentityServer project needs to be configured to use DCR to allow clients at runtime. The below steps disable the static clients and adds DCR. Add a new Duende IdentityServer InMemory project to its own directory inside the `mcp-quickstart` directory you created above.

```console
dotnet new duende-is-inmem --name "McpQuickStart.IdentityServer"
```

#### Add NuGet Packages

Add the latest versions of the `Duende.IdentityServer` and `Duende.IdentityServer.Configuration` NuGet packages to the project. The `.csproj` file should look like the below.

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web">
    <PropertyGroup>
        <TargetFramework>net10.0</TargetFramework>
        <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
        <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    </PropertyGroup>

    <ItemGroup>
        <PackageReference Include="Duende.IdentityServer" version="8.0.2"/>
        <PackageReference Include="Duende.IdentityServer.Configuration" Version="8.0.2"/>
        <PackageReference Include="Serilog.AspNetCore" Version="10.0.0" />
    </ItemGroup>
</Project>
```

#### Configure API Resources and Scopes

> No clients are statically added to IdentityServer on startup. However IdentityServer still needs to know what API Scopes and Resources will be accessing it at runtime. To enable this, edit the `Config.cs` file to look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IdentityServer will need to know what API Scopes and Resources will be required at runtime. To enable this, edit the `Config.cs` file to look like this:
```

```csharp

> public static class Config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Config.cs
public static class Config
```

{
   public static IEnumerable<IdentityResource> IdentityResources =>
   [
       new IdentityResources.OpenId(),
       new IdentityResources.Profile()
   ];

   public static IEnumerable<ApiResource> ApiResources =>
   [
       new("https://localhost:7141", "MCP Server")
       {
           Scopes = { "mcp:tools" }
       }
   ];

   public static IEnumerable<ApiScope> ApiScopes =>
   [
       new("mcp:tools")
   ];
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note the configuration does not include any client registrations. MCP clients will dynamically register with IdentityServer when needed.

```

#### Configure IdentityServer Services

When configuring services for IdentityServer: 

> 1. The DiscoveryDocument registration endpoint must be set to `RegistrationEndpointMode.Inferred`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `DiscoveryDocument` registration endpoint must be configured so that the registration endpoint is made visible, and the URL for it is inferred. You can do this by setting `options.Discovery.DynamicClientRegistration.RegistrationEndpointMode` to `RegistrationEndpointMode.Inferred`.
```

1. Add the API Scopes from `Config.cs`.
1. Add the API Resources from `Config.cs`.
1. Store the dynamically added clients. For this quickstart, keep them in memory.

When you are done, the code for the `ConfigureServices()` method inside `HostingExtensions.cs` will look like this:

```csharp
public static WebApplication ConfigureServices(this WebApplicationBuilder builder)
{
    builder.Services.AddRazorPages();

    var isBuilder = builder.Services.AddIdentityServer(options =>
    {
        // this will add the default dynamic client registration endpoint to the discovery/metadatada documents
        options.Discovery.DynamicClientRegistration.RegistrationEndpointMode = RegistrationEndpointMode.Inferred;
    })
        .AddTestUsers(TestUsers.Users)
        .AddLicenseSummary();

    // in-memory, code config
    isBuilder.AddInMemoryIdentityResources(Config.IdentityResources);
    isBuilder.AddInMemoryApiScopes(Config.ApiScopes);

>     // since this will use DCR, we do not need any pre-configured clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    // since this will use DCR, we do not need any pre-configured clients
    // note that DCR can be combined with statically configured clients, so you can mix and match
```

    isBuilder.AddInMemoryClients([]);
    isBuilder.AddInMemoryApiResources(Config.ApiResources);

    builder.Services.AddIdentityServerConfiguration(_ => { })

>         // in memory is being used here to keep the demo simple. in a real scenario, a persistent storage

Reviewer: Should comments be sentences when they are multiple sentences? (start with capital, end with .?)

(random thought, no prescription)

Author: I think for sample code, comments should be limited. The explanation should be in the documentation. I'll trim the comments so they're minimal.

        .AddInMemoryClientConfigurationStore();

    builder.Services.AddAuthentication()
        .AddOpenIdConnect("oidc", "Sign-in with demo.duendesoftware.com", options =>
        {
            options.SignInScheme = IdentityServerConstants.ExternalCookieAuthenticationScheme;
            options.SignOutScheme = IdentityServerConstants.SignoutScheme;
            options.SaveTokens = true;

            options.Authority = "https://demo.duendesoftware.com";
            options.ClientId = "interactive.confidential";
            options.ClientSecret = "secret";
            options.ResponseType = "code";

            options.TokenValidationParameters = new TokenValidationParameters
            {
                NameClaimType = "name",
                RoleClaimType = "role"
            };
        });

    // Add `.PersistKeysTo…()` and `.ProtectKeysWith…()` calls
    // See more at https://docs.duendesoftware.com/general/data-protection
    builder.Services.AddDataProtection()
        .SetApplicationName("IdentityServer");

    return builder.Build();
}
```
#### Configure IdentityServer Pipeline

> The IdentityServer middleware pipeline needs to be configured to add clients dynamically. This is done with a call to `app.MapDynamicClientRegistration();` inside the `ConfigurePipeline()` method inside `HostingExtensions.cs`.

Reviewer: Is a NuGet package required for this to work? Makes sense to repeat here.

Your `ConfigurePipeline()` method should look like this:

> ```csharp

Reviewer: For consideration: there is syntax to highlight a specific line/lines in Astro. May need to look at some other docs but seems like it could be helpful here?

public static WebApplication ConfigurePipeline(this WebApplication app)
{
    _ = app.UseSerilogRequestLogging();

    if (app.Environment.IsDevelopment())
    {
        _ = app.UseDeveloperExceptionPage();
    }

    _ = app.UseStaticFiles();
    _ = app.UseRouting();
    _ = app.UseIdentityServer();
    _ = app.UseAuthorization();

    _ = app.MapRazorPages()
        .RequireAuthorization();

>     //Add this line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // add this line
```

>     //Add this line

Reviewer 2: Astro code blocks can highlight lines without comments like this. I think it is fine right now, but just a thought.

    _ = app.MapDynamicClientRegistration();

    return app;
}
```

> #### Hard Code Application Url

Reviewer: "Update launchSettings.json For Development" or along those lines?

> #### Hard Code Application Url

Reviewer 2: The use of "Hard Code" here is odd. "Setting the Application Url for Demo Purposes"

For this quickstart, we are using known URLs for each application. Force the project to self-host at `https://localhost:5001`. The `/Properties/launchSettings.json` file should look like:

```json
{
  "profiles": {
    "https": {
      "commandName": "Project",
      "launchBrowser": true,
      "environmentVariables": {
        "ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT": "Development"
      },
      "applicationUrl": "https://localhost:5001"
    }
  }
}
```

### Create the MCP Server Project

> The MCP Server project we create will be an ASP.NET Web API that returns weather data. Start by adding a new Web API project to its own directory inside `mcp-quickstart` you created above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCP Server project we create will return weather data. Start by adding a new ASP.NET Web API project to its own directory inside `mcp-quickstart` you created above.
```

```console
dotnet new webapi --name "McpQuickStart.McpServer"
```

#### Add NuGet Packages

Add the latest versions of the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication.JwtBearer` and `ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore` NuGet packages to the project. The `.csproj` file should look like the below.

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web">
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net10.0</TargetFramework>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi" Version="10.0.10" />
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication.JwtBearer" Version="10.0.10"  />
    <PackageReference Include="ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore" Version="2.1.0" />
  </ItemGroup>
</Project>
```

#### Configure MCP Tools

> Create a new directory called `McpTools` and add a `WeatherTools.cs` C# file. This will be the API called by our clients. The code for the file is below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new directory called `McpTools` and add a `WeatherTools.cs` C# file. This will be the MCP server definition that an AI agent or an MCP client can consume. The code for the file is below.
```

> Create a new directory called `McpTools` and add a `WeatherTools.cs` C# file. This will be the API called by our clients. The code for the file is below.

Reviewer 2: "Create a new directory within the project..."

```csharp

> using System.ComponentModel;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// WeatherTools.cs
using System.ComponentModel;
```

        var forecastUrl = locationDocument?.RootElement.GetProperty("properties").GetProperty("forecast").GetString()
            ?? throw new McpException($"No forecast URL provided by {client.BaseAddress}points/{latitude},{longitude}");

        using var forecastDocument = await client.GetFromJsonAsync<JsonDocument>(forecastUrl);
        var periods = forecastDocument?.RootElement.GetProperty("properties").GetProperty("periods").EnumerateArray()
            ?? throw new McpException("No JSON returned from forecast endpoint");

        return string.Join("\n---\n", periods.Select(period => $"""
                {period.GetProperty("name").GetString()}
                Temperature: {period.GetProperty("temperature").GetInt32()}°F
                Wind: {period.GetProperty("windSpeed").GetString()} {period.GetProperty("windDirection").GetString()}
                Forecast: {period.GetProperty("detailedForecast").GetString()}
                """));
    }
}
```

#### Configure MCP Services

Inside the `Program.cs` file, configure the application to host an MCP Server. This is done by:

1. Calling `.AddMcp()`, then configuring the resource metadata clients will be able to access.

> 1. Added the endpoint for the `WeatherTools` type to the MCP Server by calling `.AddMcpServer().WithTools<WeatherTools>()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Registering the `WeatherTools` type as MCP tools the server should expose, by calling `.AddMcpServer().WithTools<WeatherTools>()`.
```

The full code for `Program.cs` looks like:

```csharp

> using System.Net.Http.Headers;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Program.cs
using System.Net.Http.Headers;
```

using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication.JwtBearer;
using Microsoft.IdentityModel.Tokens;
using ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore.Authentication;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var mcpServerUrl = "https://localhost:7141";
var inMemoryOAuthServerUrl = "https://localhost:5001";

builder.Services.AddAuthentication(options =>
    {
        options.DefaultChallengeScheme = McpAuthenticationDefaults.AuthenticationScheme;
        options.DefaultAuthenticateScheme = JwtBearerDefaults.AuthenticationScheme;
    })
    .AddJwtBearer(options =>
    {
        options.Authority = inMemoryOAuthServerUrl;

        options.TokenValidationParameters = new TokenValidationParameters
        {
            ValidateIssuerSigningKey = true,
            ValidAudience = mcpServerUrl,
            ValidIssuer = inMemoryOAuthServerUrl,
            NameClaimType = "name",
            RoleClaimType = "role"
        };
    })
    .AddMcp(options =>
    {
        options.ResourceMetadata = new()
        {
            Resource = mcpServerUrl,
            ResourceDocumentation = "https://docs.example/api/weather",
            AuthorizationServers = { inMemoryOAuthServerUrl },

>             ScopesSupported = ["mcp:tools"]

Reviewer: Should we elaborate on these?

Author: Added some text to elaborate

        };
    });

builder.Services.AddAuthorization();

builder.Services.AddHttpContextAccessor();
builder.Services.AddMcpServer()
    .WithTools<WeatherTools>()
    .WithHttpTransport();

builder.Services.AddHttpClient("WeatherApi", client =>
{
    client.BaseAddress = new Uri("https://api.weather.gov");
    client.DefaultRequestHeaders.UserAgent.Add(new ProductInfoHeaderValue("weather-tool", "1.0"));
});

var app = builder.Build();

app.UseAuthentication();
app.UseAuthorization();

app.MapMcp().RequireAuthorization();

app.Run();
```

> #### Hard Code Application Url

Reviewer: Same as previous comment.

For this quickstart, we are using known URLs for each application. Force the project to self-host at `https://localhost:7141`. The `/Properties/launchSettings.json` file should look like:

```json
{
  "profiles": {
    "https": {
      "commandName": "Project",
      "dotnetRunMessages": true,
      "launchBrowser": false,
      "applicationUrl": "https://localhost:7141",
      "environmentVariables": {
        "ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT": "Development"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Create the Client Console Application

> The MCP Server can be accessed by any client through HTTP requests. For this quickstart, we create a simple console application that will register itself with the MCP server and make a request. Add the new project to its own directory inside the `mcp-quickstart` directory you created above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCP server can be accessed by any client through HTTP requests. For this quickstart, we create a simple console application that will register itself with IdentityServer and make an authenticated request to the MCP server. Add the new project to its own directory inside the `mcp-quickstart` directory you created above.
```

```console
dotnet new console --name "McpQuickStart.Client"
```

#### Add NuGet Packages

Add the latest versions of the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication.JwtBearer` and `ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore` NuGet packages to the project. The `.csproj` file should look like the below.

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">
  <PropertyGroup>
    <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
    <TargetFramework>net10.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="ModelContextProtocol" Version="2.1.0" />
  </ItemGroup>
</Project>
```

#### Implement the Client

The console client will need to:

1. Use the `ModelContextProtocol` NuGet package to create an `HttpClientTransport` object to communicate with the MCP Server.

> 1. Include a `RedirectUri` back to itself after the user signs in.

Reviewer: Why is this redirect needed? Probably elaborate a little bit.

Author: Added some text to elaborate

1. After user sign-in completes, make a call to the MCP Server using the `get_alerts` tool implemented by the MCP Server and output its response.

The code for the entire console application is:

```csharp

> using System.Diagnostics;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Program.cs
using System.Diagnostics;
```

using System.Net;
using System.Text;
using System.Web;

using ModelContextProtocol.Authentication;
using ModelContextProtocol.Client;
using ModelContextProtocol.Protocol;

var mcpServerUrl = "https://localhost:7141";

Console.WriteLine("Protected MCP Client");
Console.WriteLine($"Connecting to server at {mcpServerUrl}...");
Console.WriteLine();

var httpClient = new HttpClient();

var transport = new HttpClientTransport(new HttpClientTransportOptions
{
    Endpoint = new Uri(mcpServerUrl),
    Name = "Weather MCP Client",
    OAuth = new ClientOAuthOptions
    {
        RedirectUri = new Uri("http://localhost:1179/callback"),
        AuthorizationCallbackHandler = HandleAuthorizationUrlAsync,
        DynamicClientRegistration = new DynamicClientRegistrationOptions
        {
            ClientName = "ProtectedMcpClient"
        },

>         Scopes = ["mcp:tools"],

Reviewer: Do these need elaboration?

{
    Console.WriteLine("No tools available on the server.");
    return;
}

Console.WriteLine($"Found {tools.Count} tools on the server.");
Console.WriteLine();

if (tools.Any(t => t.Name == "get_alerts"))
{
    Console.WriteLine("Calling get_alerts tool...");

    var result = await client.CallToolAsync("get_alerts", new Dictionary<string, object?> { ["state"] = "NY" });

    Console.WriteLine("Result: " + ((TextContentBlock)result.Content[0]).Text);
    Console.WriteLine();
}

/// Handles the OAuth authorization URL by starting a local HTTP server and opening a browser.
/// This implementation demonstrates how SDK consumers can provide their own authorization flow.
/// </summary>
/// <param name="authorizationUrl">The authorization URL to open in the browser.</param>
/// <param name="redirectUri">The redirect URI where the authorization code will be sent.</param>
/// <param name="cancellationToken">The cancellation token.</param>
/// <returns>The authorization code extracted from the callback, or null if the operation failed.</returns>
// static async Task<string?> HandleAuthorizationUrlAsync(Uri authorizationUrl, Uri redirectUri, CancellationToken cancellationToken)

> static async Task<AuthorizationResult?> HandleAuthorizationUrlAsync(AuthorizationCallbackContext authContext, CancellationToken cancellationToken)

Reviewer: Does this need elaboration in text?

Author: Added some text to elaborate

        }

        Console.WriteLine("Authorization code received successfully.");
        return new AuthorizationResult
        {
            Code = code,
            State = state,
            Iss = iss
        };
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Error getting auth code: {ex.Message}");
        return null;
    }
    finally
    {
        if (listener.IsListening) listener.Stop();
    }
}

/// <summary>
/// Opens the specified URL in the default browser.
/// </summary>
/// <param name="url">The URL to open.</param>
static void OpenBrowser(Uri url)
{
    // Validate the URI scheme - only allow safe protocols
    if (url.Scheme != Uri.UriSchemeHttp && url.Scheme != Uri.UriSchemeHttps)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Error: Only HTTP and HTTPS URLs are allowed.");
        return;
    }

    try
    {
        var psi = new ProcessStartInfo
        {
            FileName = url.ToString(),
            UseShellExecute = true
        };
        Process.Start(psi);
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Error opening browser: {ex.Message}");
        Console.WriteLine($"Please manually open this URL: {url}");
    }
}
```

> ### Run the Samples

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to see some of the console output from the MCP tool and the console client.

Author: Added

Start the IdentityServer and MCP Server applications, then run the console client. When prompted to sign in for the console client, use username `bob` with password `bob` to sign in. The console will output the response from the MCP Server after it self-registers.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe repeat with a list what happened behind the scenes? (client requested server, server said need auth via IdP URL, client sees it can self register with DCR, self registers client, then does interactive auth in the browser with new client ID, then makes request to server, ...)

Author: Added some text to elaborate
